[DOCS] Steps for updating TLS certificates (#73781)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/security/securing-communications/update-tls-certificates.asciidoc

[[update-node-certs]]
== Updating node security certificates

> If your cluster certificates expired or you have a new Certificate Authority

Reviewer: The best practice would be to change these (soon) before the certificates expire, can we amend the wording to signal that ?

Reviewer: It's not very common for users and organizations to have a new Certificate Authority. Most commonly users want to add a new node and realize that they don't still have the CA key for the CA that they originally used to create the certificates

Author: I think we can change this to read:

> If your cluster certificates are expiring soon or you no longer have the key for your existing Certificate Authority (CA), then you'll need to update the certificates for both the transport and HTTP layers.

Reviewer: The " or you no longer have the key for your existing Certificate Authority (CA), " is not enough on its own right? The reasons to change certs can be: 

- node certificates are expiring soon
- they need to add new nodes
- they need to rotate node certificates for other reason ( a node key was leaked etc )
- they have a new CA that they need to trust ( because the old one is not in use any more or because the CA key was compromised, etc )

For the first 3 there is a case where they still have access to the original CA that generated the previous certificates and they can us that and a case where they don't so they need to generate/use a new one.

Author: I'm going to rewrite most of this section to expand on these use cases.

> (CA), then you'll need to update the security certificates for both the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(CA), then you'll need to update the certificates for both the
```

> transport and HTTP layers. When updating your node security certificates, there

Reviewer: Let's not call them security certificates. I think "certificates" is just fine if the first time we mention something `X.509 Certificates" or "certificates used for TLS"

are two main scenarios that you'll encounter:

> * <<update-node-certs-same,Your certificate authority (CA) or key remains the same>>

Reviewer: Usually the key _and_ certificate changes. It can happen that only the certificate changes and the key remains the same but this is not a common use case enough to name the category after it I think

Author: ++ We can change these to read: 

> * <<update-node-certs-same,Your CA and key remains the same>>
> * <<update-node-certs-different,Your CA certificate and key changes>>

* <<update-node-certs-different,Your CA certificate or key changes>>

Regardless of the scenario, {es} monitors the SSL resources for updates

> on a five-second interval. You can just copy the new certificate and key files

Reviewer: mention the 5 sec is the default value?

Author: I'll change this to read, "{es} monitors the SSL resources for updates on a five-second interval, which is the default."

(or keystore) into the {es} configuration directory and your nodes will detect
the changes. 

Because {es} doesn't reload the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration,
you must use *the same file names* so that {es} refreshes the security

> certificates and keys. This method of updating certificates is preferred

Reviewer: I don;t think we need to make assumptions on what is the best for the users here? Furthermore, in most cases they can do this with rolling restarts (no service interruption)

Author: I think we can just delete this sentence beginning with "This method of updating..." and keep the preceding sentence.

because it doesn't require a full cluster restart.

If you need to update the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration or change

> certificate passwords that are stored in the

Reviewer: certificates don't have passwords, keys and keystores usually do

Author: ++ I'll change to read:

>If you need to update the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration or change passwords for keys or keystores that are stored in the <<secure-settings,secure settings>>..."

<<secure-settings,secure settings>>, then you must complete a full cluster
restart. {es} will not reload changes for passwords stored in the secure

> settings. We recommend <<use-rolling-restarts,rolling restarts>> when restarting your cluster.

Reviewer: we're mixing up full cluster restart and rolling restart in this sentence

Author: Let's remove the mention of full cluster restart entirely and say:

> If you need to update the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration or change passwords for keys or keystores that are stored in the <<secure-settings,secure settings>>, then you must complete a <<use-rolling-restarts,rolling restart>>. {es} will not reload changes for passwords stored in the secure settings.

[[use-rolling-restarts]]
.Rolling restarts are preferred
****
While it's possible to do an in-place update for security certificates, using
a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster is safer. An in-place update avoids some
complications of a rolling restart, but incurs the following risks:

* If you use PEM files, your certificate and key are in separate files. You
must update both files _simultaneously_ or the node might experience a temporary
period where it cannot establish new connections.
* Updating the certificate and key does not automatically force existing
connections to refresh. This means that even if you make a mistake, a node can
seem like it's functioning but only because it still has existing connections.
It's possible that a node will be unable to connect with other nodes, rendering
it unable to recover from a network outage or node restart.
****

[[update-node-certs-same]]
=== Update security certificates with the same CA
++++
<titleabbrev>With the same CA</titleabbrev>
++++

> If your CA hasn't changed, you can just generate a new certificate, save it with

Reviewer: 2 lines ago we said that in place is not the preferred way to go and we're suggesting now that users should do that. Maybe also always qualify "certificate" with either "node.. " or "CA.. " so that we don't confuse readers?

Author: But a rolling restart is only required if the keystore is password protected, the password is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, correct? Or do we recommend that users perform a rolling restart regardless?

the same name as your existing certificate, and replace the existing file.
You'll need to generate new certificates and keys for both the transport layer
and the HTTP layer.

This procedure assumes that the you have access to the CA certificate and key
that was originally generated (or otherwise held by your organization) and used
to sign the certificate that is currently in use. It also assumes that the
clients connecting to {es} on the HTTP layer are configured to trust the CA
certificate.

TIP: If your CA has changed, complete the steps in 
<<update-node-certs-different,update security certificates with a different CA>>.

[[node-certs-same-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer
Create a new PKCS#12 file that contains a certificate and key and replace
the existing PKCS#12 file (such as `elastic-certificates.p12`) with the new
certificate. 

NOTE: The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS keystores.

. Open the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file and check the names of the

> security certificates that are currently in use. You'll use the same names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keystores that are currently in use. You'll use the same names
```

> for your new certificate.

Reviewer: keystores

+

> In this example, the keystore and truststore are pointing to different files.

Reviewer: What should the user do then ? Do we need to add some text here?

Author: Does this expanded text suffice? Is there any other difference or can user just point to the same file for both the keystore and truststore?

> In this example, the keystore and truststore are pointing to different files. Your configuration might use the same file that contains the certificate and CA. In this case, include the path to that file for both the keystore and truststore.

Your configuration might use the same file that contains the certificate and CA.
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12

> xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.password: password

Reviewer: xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.password is deprecated, do we want to point to it? Also, a few lines below we suggest users they add the password for the new keystore to the secure settings. The latter is best practice but it is maybe confusing to mention both in the same example?

Author: I didn't realize that this setting was deprecated, so thanks for the reminder! I'll remove it in favor of adding the password to the keystore in the secure settings.

> xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-ca.p12

Reviewer: let's use `elastic-stack-ca.p12` or `elastic-ca.p12` throughout this example

Author: I'll use `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.

xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.password: password
----

> . On any node in your cluster, generate a certificate and private key for your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On every node in your cluster, generate a certificate and private key for your
```

> . On any node in your cluster, generate a certificate and private key for your

Reviewer: This makes the assumption that each node uses it's own keystore with a different key and certificate. This can be true, but our default docs suggest to use the same keystore (key/certificate) for all the nodes for the transport layer. Should we add this case in the docs here too?

node. You must include the CA that was used to sign the certificate currently
in use.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil cert --ca elastic-stack-ca.p12
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====

>    `--ca <ca_file>`:: Name of the CA file used to sign your certificates. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `--ca <ca_file>`:: Name of the CA keystore used to sign your certificates. The
```

   default file name from the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool is
   `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.
====
+

>     a. Enter the password for your CA when prompted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    a. Enter the password for your CA keystore when prompted.
```

>     b. Enter the name for your certificate, which must match the name of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    b. Enter the name for your keystore, which must match the name of the
```

>     certificate currently in use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    keystore currently in use.
```

>     c. (Optional) Enter a password for your certificate. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    c. (Optional) Enter a password for your keystore. 
```

. If you entered a password when creating the node certificate, run the following commands to store the password in the {es} keystore:
+
--
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----

[source,shell]
----

> ./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.secure_password

Reviewer: Since this points to the CA keystore in our example, they should not overwrite/set its password, which presumably hasn't changed

Author: ++ I'll remove the command for updating the truststore password, which isn't necessary here.

----
--

> . [[cert-password-updates]] If your certificate is password protected, the password is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster. Complete the steps until the step that indicates *Perform any needed changes*, and then continue to the next step to replace your existing certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. [[cert-password-updates]] If your keystore is password protected, the password is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster. Complete the steps until the step that indicates *Perform any needed changes*, and then continue to the next step to replace your existing certificates.
```

> . [[cert-password-updates]] If your certificate is password protected, the password is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster. Complete the steps until the step that indicates *Perform any needed changes*, and then continue to the next step to replace your existing certificates.

Reviewer: Where is the "Perform any needed changes" step ?

Author: Step 5 of performing a [Rolling restart](https://elasticsearch_73781.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/restart-cluster.html#restart-cluster-rolling) indicates **Perform any needed changes**. In this [discuss forum post](https://discuss.elastic.co/t/updating-node-certificate-on-existing-cluster/243413/2), Tim indicated that this is the step when users should update the keystore (when the node is stopped).

Reviewer: It wasn't clear that the "perform needed changes" step was pointing to the rolling restart docs. It is is now but it wasn't the first time I read this. If it's not just me, should we find a way to make this clearer ?

> . [[cert-password-updates]] If your certificate is password protected, the password is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster. Complete the steps until the step that indicates *Perform any needed changes*, and then continue to the next step to replace your existing certificates.

Reviewer: We need to be more clear here I think. If the node needs to be restarted, then they should _not_ use the same name because that it will not trigger an automatic reload of the keystore and this would fail because of the password

Also, be clear that the order is :
1. Change/set the password in the secure settings (1 and 2 are interchangeable)
2. Change/set the file name in elasticsearch.yml
3. Restart the node

Author: I'm updating these steps in the next push, but I'd like to chat through them with you.

> . Replace your existing certificate with the new certificate, ensuring that the

Reviewer: certificate -> keystore . Maybe also name it to be precise ?

Author: ++ I'll change to read:

>Replace your existing keystore with the new keystore, ensuring that the file names match. For example, `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.

file names match.

> . Repeat the previous step on each node in your cluster to update the existing certificate, completing a rolling restart beforehand if your certificate matches the password stipulations outlined in <<cert-password-updates,this step>>.

Reviewer: certificiate => "keystore" or "key and certificate"

Reviewer: They don't need to perform a rolling restart after the changes in every node. They need to restart the node after the changes in every node, which - after doing it for all nodes - will constitute a rolling restart of the cluster

Author: I think that these steps provide greater clarity:

> . On every node in your cluster, replace your existing keystore with the new keystore, ensuring that the file names match. For example, `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.
> 
> . After replacing the keystore on every node in your cluster, restart each node one at a time.
> 
> . If your keystore password changed and you started a rolling restart in  <<cert-password-updates,this step>>, complete the remaining steps to finish the rolling restart.

Author: > They don't need to perform a rolling restart after the changes in every node. They need to restart the node after the changes in every node, which - after doing it for all nodes - will constitute a rolling restart of the cluster

But if they're using the same file name, they **do not** need to restart the node, correct? Or do they need to restart the node regardless of whether they're using the same file name of the existing keystore file?

[[update-node-certs]]
== Updating node security certificates
If your cluster certificates are expiring soon or you no longer have the key for
your existing Certificate Authority (CA), then you'll need to update the TLS

> certificates for both the transport and HTTP layers. When updating your node

Author: I'm rewriting this section and adding the following sentence:
>Depending on which certificates are expiring, you might need to update the certificates for the transport layer, the HTTP layer, or both.

passwords stored in the secure settings. 

[[use-rolling-restarts]]
.Rolling restarts are preferred
****
While it's possible to do an in-place update for security certificates, using
a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster is safer. An in-place update avoids some
complications of a rolling restart, but incurs the following risks:

* If you use PEM files, your certificate and key are in separate files. You
must update both files _simultaneously_ or the node might experience a temporary
period where it cannot establish new connections.
* Updating the certificate and key does not automatically force existing
connections to refresh. This means that even if you make a mistake, a node can
seem like it's functioning but only because it still has existing connections.
It's possible that a node will be unable to connect with other nodes, rendering
it unable to recover from a network outage or node restart.
****

[[update-node-certs-same]]
=== Update security certificates with the same CA
++++
<titleabbrev>With the same CA</titleabbrev>
++++

If your CA hasn't changed, you can replace your existing certificate on each

> node with a new certificate that has the same filename. When {es} restarts, it

Reviewer: I think a generic sentence here that doesn't include some of the steps/options that we mention below is clearer. Something ( but not exactly ) like: "If you can use the existing CA, which means that you can have certificates signed by the organization CA that you used before or that you still have the CA key and certificate that you generated before, than you only need to replace the keys and certificates of your cluster nodes. You don't necessarily need to restart each node, but doing so forces....."

> node with a new certificate that has the same filename. When {es} restarts, it

Author: I'm rewriting the beginning of this section as follows:

> If you have access to the CA used to sign your existing certificates, you only need to replace the certificates and keys for each node in your cluster. If you replace your existing certificates and keys on each node use the same filenames, {es} reloads the files starts using the new certificates and keys.
> 
> You don't have to restart each node, but doing so forces new TLS connections and is <<use-rolling-restarts,a recommended practice>> when updating certificates. Therefore, the following steps include a node restart after updating each certificate.

reloads the file and uses the new certificate. Using the same filename means
that you don't have to update the `elasticsearch.yml` file, and can just
replace the existing certificate.

You don't have to restart each node, but doing so forces new TLS connections and is <<use-rolling-restarts,a recommended practice>> when updating certificates.
Therefore, the following steps include a node restart after updating each
certificate.

> You'll generate new node certificates and keys for both the transport layer and

Reviewer: Same comment about _both_ not being necessarily true.

Author: We can amend to read:
>The following steps provide instructions for generating new node certificates and keys for both the transport layer and the HTTP layer. You might only need to replace one of these certificates depending on which of your certificates are expiring.

Reviewer: one of these layer's certificates most probably but ++ to the essence of the suggested change

the HTTP layer.

[[cert-password-updates]] 
IMPORTANT: If your keystore is password protected, the password

> is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is stored in the {es} secure settings, _and_ the password needs to change, then you
```

so that users dont need to keep track of what keystore is which within the same sentence ?

> must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster. You

Reviewer: You don't need to use a different file name for the keystore so that {es} reloads the new file, but so that it doesn't reload the file before the node is restarted

Author: Ah, got it! Thanks for clarifying this for me.

Reviewer: SGTM! I'va added a comment below regarding attempting to focus the attention of users to _not overwriting_ the existing files on copy/paste, rather than focusing on _not generating files_ with the same name, so we might change this but I'm fine with how it reads now

must also use a different file name for the keystore so that {es} reloads the
new file.

> This procedure assumes that the you have access to the CA certificate and key

Reviewer: lets move this in the beginning

Author: ++

that was originally generated (or otherwise held by your organization) and used
to sign the certificate that is currently in use. It also assumes that the
clients connecting to {es} on the HTTP layer are configured to trust the CA
certificate.

TIP: If your CA has changed, complete the steps in 
<<update-node-certs-different,update security certificates with a different CA>>.

[[node-certs-same-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer

> Create a new PKCS#12 file that contains a certificate and key and replace

Reviewer: Again, I find the summary in the beginning that contains a subset/summary of the steps slightly confusing. Can we be very generic and move straight to the concrete steps ?

the existing PKCS#12 file (such as `elastic-certificates.p12`) with the new

> certificate. Stop one node at a time, replace the node certificate, and then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
certificate. Stop one node at a time, replace the node keystore, and then
```

> restart the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start the node.
```

NOTE: The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS
keystores.

> . Open the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file and check the names of the

Reviewer: I was wondering. If this is a production cluster, then users should probably do all the steps that are dictated in our rolling restart guide _plus_ the change in the keystore we mention here ( rather than simply restarting the node ) in order to minimize service disruption. Should we try to find a way to tie into the rolling restart process by referencing steps or pointing to that doc more prominently?

Author: As Tim outlined in this [discuss forum post](https://discuss.elastic.co/t/updating-node-certificate-on-existing-cluster/243413/2):

> - Follow all the steps of a rolling restart.
> - While each node is stopped (the _Perform any needed changes step_), switch the node's SSL certificate and key. 

So I think that this approach can work:

1. Instruct users to complete all of the necessary steps to generate the keystores and certificates that they'll need.
2. Where we currently tell users to stop Elasticsearch, instruct them to begin a [rolling restart](https://elasticsearch_73781.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/restart-cluster.html#restart-cluster-rolling), but stop at step 5 for _Perform any needed changes_.
3. Replace the keystore files and certificates.
4. Complete the remaining steps for performing a rolling restart.

Does that seem like the right approach?

Reviewer: Yes, I think that should be the safest option for our users!

Author: I incorporated the rolling restart steps in c82ffdb82049d4dd5a25c8a12bb9839220e62e58

keystores that are currently in use. You'll use the same names for your new
certificate.
+
In this example, the keystore and truststore are pointing to different files.
Your configuration might use the same file that contains the certificate and CA.
In this case, include the path to that file for both the keystore and truststore.
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. On every node in your cluster, generate a certificate and private key for your

> node. You must include the CA that was used to sign the certificate currently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
node. You must use the CA that was used to sign the certificate currently
```

in use.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil cert --ca elastic-stack-ca.p12
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `--ca <ca_file>`:: Name of the CA keystore used to sign your certificates. The
   default file name from the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool is
   `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.
====
+
    a. Enter the password for your CA keystore when prompted.

    b. Enter the name for your keystore, which must match the name of the
    keystore currently in use.
+

> NOTE: If your 

Reviewer: This is confusing I think. I know why we're adding it here but still. Maybe don;t focus on what the output file name of the tool should be but only that they should or shuld not overwrite the existing file below?

<<cert-password-updates,keystore password is changing>>, then save the
keystore with a new filename. 

    c. (Optional) Enter a password for your keystore. 

> . If you entered a password when creating the node certificate, run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you entered a password when creating the node keystore, and if it is different than the one the current keystore has, run the
```

following command to store the password in the {es} keystore:
+
--
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----
--

> . Stop {es} on the first node in your cluster where you are updating the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Stop {es} on the current node in your cluster where you are updating the
```

keystore.

. Replace your existing keystore with the new keystore, ensuring that the
file names match. For example, `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.

> . If your keystore is password protected, the password is stored in the {es}

Reviewer: this can be simplified. We can explain in the previous step when to overwrite the file and when to store under a differnet filename and here simply say "if you needed to change the filename then update the elasticsearch.yml to reflect that"

Author: ++ I think we can amend these two steps as follows:

> . Replace your existing keystore with the new keystore, ensuring that the file names match. For example, `elastic-stack-ca.p12`.
> 
> If your <<cert-password-updates,keystore password is changing>>, then save the
> keystore with a new filename. 
> 
> . If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.

Reviewer: sounds good to me. Maybe add some little detail:

", then save the keystore with a new filename." ->  ", then save the keystore with a new filename so that {es} will not attempt to reload the file before you had the chance to update the password."

Author: ++ I'll make that change throughout.

keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore
file that you created.

> . Restart the node where you updated the keystore. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start the node where you updated the keystore. 
```

. (Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

> . On each additional node in your cluster, stop {es}, update the keystore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On each additional node in your cluster, perform the previous steps,
```

and restart {es}.

[[node-certs-same-http]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the HTTP layer

> The certificate for the HTTP layer is used to verify other components when they

Reviewer: the other components verify this certificate when connecting to {es}, it's not {es} that verifies other components when they connect

Author: I'll change to read:
>Other components such as {kib} or any of the Elastic language clients verify this certificate when they connect to {es}.

connect to {es}, such as {kib} or any of the Elastic language clients.

> . Stop {es} and {kib} on the first node in your cluster where you are updating

Reviewer: kibana and es won't necessarily be on the same node. Let's break this into 2 steps, one for kibana and one for es

Reviewer: Also, we do we suggest that they stop kibana ?

Author: I thought that we had to stop Kibana. Now that I think more, that might only be necessary if users are updating the certificate for [encrypting HTTP communications for Kibana](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-basic-setup-https.html#encrypt-kibana-http). Is that worth calling out here?

Reviewer: If ES has TLS enabled for HTTP ( which is an assumption here because we are rotating HTTP TLS certificates ) then Kibana has to trust this certificate when communicating with ES. The common way to do this in Kibana ( and other clients, and TLS in general ) is to trust the CA certificate that has signed a certificate( in kibana the setting is `elasticsearch.ssl.certificateAuthorities:` ) . 

In the case that we are reusing the CA , Kibana needs no update to its config, thus no need to stop it. 

In the case that we are using a new CA, Kibana configuration needs to be updated to trust the new CA. We should check with kibana-security what is the best way for the configuration to be updated in kibana and whether or not it requires kibana to be restarted and incorporate this here

Author: @legrego, can we get your input here? This PR adds documentation for [updating TLS certificates](https://elasticsearch_73781.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/update-node-certs.html), and I'm wondering if we also need to update the cert for encrypting HTTP communications for Kibana. If so, what's the best way to update the configuration and where in this process should users stop/restart Kibana?

Reviewer 2: If the CA is changing, then Kibana should be updated to trust the new CA, which requires a restart. The way this happens depends on the format of the CA: we accept either PEM or PKCS#12, and the way to configure these is outlined in **step 3** here: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/configuring-tls.html#configuring-tls-kib-es

The recommended order of operations for Kibana is:
1) Update the configuration
2) Restart Kibana

You could stop Kibana beforehand if you want to -- either approach would be fine.

FWIW, we have an open issue to support CA/cert updates without a restart, but it's not something we offer today: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/101072

Author: Thanks @legrego -- I added instructions for updating the Kibana certificate in c855d0e8fb195f51037d685fab4535f200c23363

the HTTP certificate. 

. From the directory where you installed {es}, run the {es} HTTP certificate 
tool.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil http
----
+
This command generates a `.zip` file that contains certificates and keys
to use with {es} and {kib}. Each folder contains a `README.txt`
explaining how to use these files.

>    a. When asked if you want to generate a CSR, enter `n`.

Reviewer: these steps imply that users are using a self-signed CA that we generate with our tooling. Is it worth having something around the possibility that they have an organization CA that they can use ? ( they'd generate CSRs here in this case )

Author: I'm going to add the same note from [this comment](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781#discussion_r657333908) in the introduction for generating a certificate for the HTTP layer to inform users at the beginning of this task.

   b. When asked if you want to use an existing CA, enter `y`.

   c. Enter the absolute path to your CA, such as the path to the
    `elastic-stack-ca.p12` file.

   d. Enter the password for your CA.

>    e. Enter an expiration value for your certificate. You can enter the

Reviewer: lets add a more safe example, users often confuse our examples for suggestions, let's do 1y

Author: ++ I'll make that change.

   validity period in years, months, or days. For example, enter `90D` for 90
   days.

   f. When asked if you want to generate one certificate per node, enter `y`.
+
Each certificate will have its own private key, and will be issued for a
specific hostname or IP address.

   g. When prompted, enter the name of the first node in your cluster. Use the
   same node name as the value for the `node.name` parameter in the
   `elasticsearch.yml` file.

   h. Enter all hostnames used to connect to your first node. These hostnames
   will be added as DNS names in the Subject Alternative Name (SAN) field in your certificate.
+
List every hostname and variant used to connect to your cluster over HTTPS.

   i. Enter the IP addresses that clients can use to connect to your node.

   j. Repeat these steps for each additional node in your cluster.

. After generating a certificate for each of your nodes, enter a password for
   your private key when prompted.

. Unzip the generated `elasticsearch-ssl-http.zip` file. This compressed file
   contains one directory for both {es} and {kib}.
+
--
[source,txt]
----

> /elasticsearch

Reviewer: This can't be the output when we're generating all the node http certificates at once right? Don't we get one keystore for every node ?

Author: Correct. I think that we should use an `instances.yml` file here that mirrors the steps for generating certs with a new CA, which you mentioned in another comment.

|_ README.txt
|_ http.p12
|_ sample-elasticsearch.yml
----

[source,txt]
----
/kibana
|_ README.txt
|_ elasticsearch-ca.pem
|_ sample-kibana.yml
----
--

. If necessary, rename the `http.p12` file to match the name of your existing
certificate for HTTP client communications. This keystore contains both a
certificate and key.

. Replace your existing keystore (such as `http.p12`) with the new keystore,
ensuring that the file names match.
+

> IMPORTANT: If your keystore is password protected, the password

Reviewer: same comment as above

Author: I'll update this to match the other section.

is stored in the {es} keystore, _and_ the password needs to change, then you
must update the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the
new keystore file that you created.

> . Add the password for your private key to the secure settings in {es}.

Reviewer: if the password needs to cahnge

+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----

. Restart the node where you updated the keystore. {es} will reload the file and
its configuration and start presenting the new  certificate to the incoming TLS
connections.

. (Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

> . On each additional node in your cluster, stop {es} and {kib}, update the

Reviewer: maybe qualify "update the keystore" more. As in that they have to copy the keystore from the first node where they created all of them, to the specific node and follow a subset of the steps (even better explicitly note down which steps)

Author: I'll provide more clarity around these steps.

keystore, and restart {es} and {kib}.

[[update-node-certs-different]]
=== Update security certificates with a different CA
++++
<titleabbrev>With a different CA</titleabbrev>
++++

> If your CA is changing, you'll need to generate a new CA certificate and key.

Reviewer: same comment, I find this summary oversimplifying and possibly confusing for users

use the new files. 

[[node-certs-different-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer
Create a new CA certificate and add it to your existing CA truststore. After
{es} reloads the file, you can remove the old CA certificate from your
truststore.

NOTE: The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS
keystores.

. Open the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file and check the names of the
security certificates that are currently in use. You'll use the same names
for your new certificates.
+
In this example, the keystore and truststore are using different files.
Your configuration might use the same file for both the keystore and the 
truststore. Elastic recommends using separate files. 
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. On *any* node in your cluster, generate a new CA certificate. You only need
to complete this step one time.
+

> NOTE: If your organization has its own CA, then use that CA to generate a new

Reviewer: This is not accurate. If the organization has its own CA then what the users would need to do is to generate CSRs and send them to the CA to get back signed certificates

Author: We can change this to read:
>NOTE: If your organization has its own CA, you'll need to  <<certutil-csr,generate Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs)>>. CSRs contain information that your CA uses to generate and sign a security certificate instead of using self-signed certificates that the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool generates.

----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `--pem`:: Generates a directory containing a CA certificate and key in PEM
   format instead of PKCS#12. 
====

    a. Enter a name for the compressed output file that will contain your
    certificate and key, or accept the default name of `elastic-stack-ca.zip`.

    b. Unzip the output file. The resulting directory contains a CA certificate
    (`ca.crt`) and a private key (`ca.key`).
+
--
IMPORTANT: Keep these file in a secure location as they contain the private key
for your CA. 
--

. On *every* node in your cluster, import the new `ca.crt` certificate into your
existing CA truststore. This step ensures that your cluster trusts the new CA
certificate. This example uses the Java `keytool` utility to import the
certificate into the `elastic-stack-ca.p12` CA truststore.
+
[source,shell]
----
keytool -importcert -trustcacerts -noprompt -keystore elastic-stack-ca.p12 \
-storepass <password>  -alias new-ca -file ca.crt
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-keystore`:: Name of the truststore that you are importing the new CA
   certificate into. 

   `-storepass`:: Password for the CA truststore. 

>    `-alias`:: Name that you want to assign to the new CA certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `-alias`:: Name that you want to assign to the new CA certificate entry in the keystore.
```

   `-file`:: Name of the new CA certificate to import.
====

. Check that the new CA certificate was added to your truststore. The output
should contain both the existing CA certificate and your new certificate. Each
CA certificate is identified by the `friendlyName` attribute in the output.
+
When prompted, enter the password for the CA truststore.
+
[source,shell]
----

> openssl pkcs12 -info -in config/elastic-stack-ca.p12

Reviewer: lets stick to one external tool when possible, maybe: `keytool -keystore config/elastic-stack-ca.p12 -list` ?

----

> . (Optional) Remove the old CA certificate from your truststore. 

Reviewer: Not yet!!! This should be the last step on each node

Author: ++ I'll move this step to the end after users verify the new keystore.

+
[source,shell]
----
keytool -delete -noprompt -alias old-ca  -keystore config/elastic-stack-ca.p12 \
-storepass <password>
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-alias`:: Name of the old CA certificate that you want to remove from your
   truststore.
====

[discrete]
[[node-certs-different-nodes]]
==== Generate a new certificate for each node in your cluster

> Now that your CA truststore is updated, use your new CA certificate to sign

Reviewer: is it on purpose that we use instances.yml here but not in the same case when the same CA is used? Covering more options is fine but consistency is also helpful, not sure what's the best way

Author: I think we should use `instances.yml` throughout, and I'll update the "same CA" instructions to use that method.

+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil cert --in instances.yml --ca-cert ca/ca.crt \
--ca-key ca/ca.key
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-in`:: Specifies the name of the input YAML file (`instances.yml`)
   containing information about each of your nodes.

   `--ca-cert`:: Specifies the path to your new CA certificate (`ca.crt`) in PEM
   format. You must also specify the `--ca-key` parameter.

   `--ca-key`:: Specifies the path to the private key (`ca.key`) for your CA
   certificate. You must also specify the `--ca-cert` parameter.
====

   a. Enter a name for the output file or accept the default of
   `certificate-bundle.zip`.

   b. When prompted, enter a password for each node certificate. It's good
   practice to use a different password for each node certificate and store the
   files in a secure location.

   c. Decompress the `certificate-bundle.zip` file. The output contains a
   directory for each of your nodes with a `<node-name>.p12` file.

   d. Rename the `<node-name>.p12` file to match the existing file name
   specified by the `xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path` variable in 

>    the `elasticsearch.yml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the `elasticsearch.yml` file on each node.
```

. On *every* node, copy the appropriate node certificate to the `ES_PATH_CONF`
directory.
+
NOTE: The `ES_PATH_CONF` variable is the path for the {es}
configuration files. If you installed {es} using archive distributions
(`zip` or `tar.gz`), the variable defaults to `ES_HOME/config`. If you used
package distributions (Debian or RPM), the variable defaults to `/etc/elasticsearch`.

> 

Reviewer: Shouldn't we restart the node too ?

> . Delete the old node certificate from each node. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Delete the old node keystore from each node. 
```

Reviewer: We instructed users to overwrite the keystore so there's prbably nothing to delete right?

[[node-certs-different-http]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the HTTP layer
You can generate certificates for the HTTP layer using your new CA certificate

> and private key. This certificate is used to verify other components when they

Reviewer: same comment as above about who verifies what in this case

Author: I'll update this sentence to use the same one outlined in [this comment](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781#discussion_r657341857).

connect to {es}, such as {kib} or any of the Elastic language clients.

. Stop {es} and {kib} on the first node in your cluster where you are updating
the HTTP certificate. 

. From the directory where you installed {es}, run the {es} HTTP certificate 
tool.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil http
----
+

> This command generates a `.zip` file that contains certificates and keys

Reviewer: similar comments as with the same CA section

[[update-node-certs]]
== Updating node security certificates
You might need to update your TLS certificates if your current node
certificates expire soon, you're adding new nodes to your secured cluster, or
a security breach has broken the trust of your certificate chain.

> In instances where you have access to the original Certificate Authority (CA) key and certificate that you used to sign your existing node certificates (and where your CA has not been compromised), you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In instances where you have access to the original Certificate Authority (CA) key and certificate that you used to sign your existing node certificates (and where your can still trust that CA), you can
```

Author: ++ I'll make this change.

<<update-node-certs-same,use that CA to sign the new certificates>>.

If you have to trust a new CA from your organization, or you need to generate a new CA yourself, you need to use this new CA to sign the new node certificates and instruct your nodes to trust the new CA. In this case, you'll
<<update-node-certs-different,generate a new node certificate and key>> for each
node that is signed by the new CA certificate and instruct your nodes to trust

> this certificate chain.

Reviewer: I find this confusing, it makes it sound like you need to generate new keys and certificates for each node _only_ in this case, which is not true.  What is different between the two cases is what signs these new certificates , can we focus on that instead ?

Author: I'll update this sentence to:
>In this case, you'll <<update-node-certs-different,sign node certificates with your new CA>> and instruct your nodes to trust this certificate chain.

replace your existing certificates and keys on each node and use the same
filenames, {es} reloads the files starts using the new certificates and keys.

You don't have to restart each node, but doing so forces new TLS connections and is <<use-rolling-restarts,a recommended practice>> when updating certificates.
Therefore, the following steps include a node restart after updating each
certificate.

The following steps provide instructions for generating new node certificates
and keys for both the transport layer and the HTTP layer. You might only need
to replace one of these layer's certificates depending on which of your
certificates are expiring.

[[cert-password-updates]] 
IMPORTANT: If your keystore is password protected, the password
is stored in the {es} secure settings, _and_ the password needs to change, then
you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster.
You must also use a different file name for the keystore so that {es} doesn't
reload the file before the node is restarted.

TIP: If your CA has changed, complete the steps in 
<<update-node-certs-different,update security certificates with a different CA>>.

[[node-certs-same-transport]]

> ==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer

Reviewer: we're now making the assumption that `xpack.security.transport.ssl.verificaion_mode: certificate` is set  (which is what we suggest in other places in the doc, but it's _not_ the default value. Should we point it out ?

Author: Are you suggesting that we add `xpack.security.transport.ssl.verificaion_mode: certificate` to this [YAML example](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781/files/3be58771f839d1b4721aac855ff77a7fd476b7d8#diff-1490c74621f912bbdeb341055e902df727b240257b2fbd22bf774da6f8332f70R98-R104)? I'm +1 to that change, but just making sure I understand correctly. Same change would apply to your comment in the [later example](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781#discussion_r671205963).

Reviewer: Either that or a hint/note/warning that this set of instructions assumes that this is _already_ the case or a combination of both

Author: Cool. I'll add that setting in the yaml file and also a note that we assume that the provided certificate is signed by a trusted CA and the verification mode is set to `certificate`.

Reviewer: for future reference, we only need to put this in because we are going by (here and in other part of our docs) the simplest setup possible, which is that all of our nodes share the same key/certificate for transport TLS. The verification mode needs to be set to `certificate` so that nodes won't attempt to do hostname verification

+
IMPORTANT: If your 
<<cert-password-updates,keystore password is changing>>, then save the
keystore with a new filename so that {es} doesn't attempt to reload the file
before you update the password.

. If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore.

. [[verify-keystore,step 8]](Optional) Use the
<<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that {es} loaded the new
keystore.

. If you're only updating certificates for the transport layer (and not the HTTP layer), then complete <<start-rolling-restart>> through <<verify-keystore>> one node at a time until you've updated all keystores in your cluster. You can then
complete the remaining steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.
+

> Otherwise, do not complete a rolling restart and proceed to the steps for
> generating a new certificate for the HTTP layer.

Reviewer 3: This reads a little strangely to me.

```suggestion
Otherwise, do not complete a rolling restart. Instead, proceed to the steps for
generating a new certificate for the HTTP layer.
```

Author: +1 to being more explicit. We're using this statement in two places (one for same CA and one for new CA), so I'll make your suggested change in both instances.

+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.http.ssl.enabled: true
xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.path: node1-http.p12
----

. If your keystore password is changing, add the password for your private key
to the secure settings in {es}.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore, and then complete the remaining
steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.

. [[verify-keystore-http,step 10]](Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

. One node at a time, complete <<start-rolling-restart-http>> through
<<verify-keystore-http>> until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.

[[update-node-certs-different]]
=== Update security certificates with a different CA
++++
<titleabbrev>With a different CA</titleabbrev>
++++
If you have to trust a new CA from your organization, or you need to generate a new CA yourself, use this new CA to sign the new node certificates and instruct your nodes to trust the new CA. 

[[node-certs-different-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer

> Create a new CA certificate and add it to your existing CA truststore. After

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new CA certificate (or get the CA certificate of your organization) and add it to your existing CA truststore. After
```

Author: ++ I'll make this change.

you finish updating your certificates for all nodes, you can remove the old CA
certificate from your truststore (but not before!).

NOTE: The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS
keystores.

. Open the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file and check the names of the
keystores that are currently in use. You'll use the same names
for your new keystores.
+
In this example, the keystore and truststore are using different files.
Your configuration might use the same file for both the keystore and the 

> truststore. Elastic recommends using separate files. 

Reviewer 3: Do we? Why is that?

Author: I was talking to an SA and they indicated that using separate files for the keystore and truststore provided an easier mechanism for updating one or the other in case of compromise, and also that the using separate files provides a slight security advantage. That said, we might not explicitly recommend this particular usage. I'll remove the statement about recommending separate files.

+
[source,yaml]
----

> xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12

Reviewer: same comment about pointing out verification_mode: certificate which is implied

Author: I'll add the same note here and update the yaml example accordingly.

[source,shell]
----
keytool -delete -noprompt -alias ca  -keystore config/elastic-stack-ca.p12 \
-storepass <password>
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-alias`:: Name of the keystore alias for the old CA certificate that you want to remove from your
   truststore.
====

[discrete]
[[transport-layer-newca-whatsnext]]
==== What's next?
Well done! You've updated the keystore for the transport layer. You can also
<<node-certs-different-http,update the keystore for the HTTP layer>> if
necessary. If you're not updating the keystore for the HTTP layer, then you're
all set. 

[[node-certs-different-http]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the HTTP layer
You can generate certificates for the HTTP layer using your new CA certificate
and private key. Other components such as {kib} or any of the Elastic language
clients verify this certificate when they connect to {es}.

NOTE: If your organization has its own CA, you'll need to 
<<certutil-csr,generate Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs)>>. CSRs contain
information that your CA uses to generate and sign a security certificate
instead of using self-signed certificates that the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool
generates.

> Before generating new certificates for the HTTP layer, you need to go to all the clients that connect to {es} (such as {kib}, {beats}, {ls}, and any language

Reviewer: maybe we can move this suggestion from "before generating" to "after generating but before using". This way, we can merge this with https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781/files#diff-1490c74621f912bbdeb341055e902df727b240257b2fbd22bf774da6f8332f70R688 and use that latter as a concrete example of a "how to configure a client to trust the new ca certificate"

Author: I'm updating this beginning section to read as:

> .Update clients to trust the new CA
> ****
> After generating (but before using) new certificates for the HTTP layer, you
> need to go to all the clients that connect to {es} (such as {kib}, {beats},
> {ls}, and any language clients) and configure them to also trust the new CA
> (`ca.crt`) that you generated.
> 
> This process is different for each client, so refer to your client's
> documentation for trusting certificates.
> ****

clients) and configure them to also trust the new CA (`ca.crt`) that you
generated.

> . For *every* client that connects to {es}, import the new `ca.crt` certificate

Reviewer: let's rewrite this. This is an action that must be taken on the client side, not on elasticserach. The new `ca.crt` is one, so it doesn't make sense to import it again and again, once for every client there is , into the same keystore. We're referencing `http.p12` here but we haven't created it yet.  FWIW the http.p12 keystore will eventually contain the new ca.crt certiifcate as part of the certificate chain in the private key entry, certutil takes care of that.

It's the client that needs to trust the certificate, so it;s the client that needs to be configured to do so. The way you do this in every client is different, so I don't know if we can enumerate all these here.

Author: Ah, understood! So we would remove the next two steps (importing `ca.crt` and checking that it was imported) and instead say:
> For *every* client that connects to {es}, configure the client to trust the `ca.crt` certificate. This process is different for each client, so refer to your client's documentation for trusting certificates.

Reviewer: ++

> . For *every* client that connects to {es}, import the new `ca.crt` certificate
> into your existing CA truststore for the HTTP layer. This step ensures that your
> cluster trusts the new CA certificate. This example uses the Java `keytool`
> utility to import the certificate into the `http.p12` CA truststore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. For *every* client that connects to {es}, configure the client to trust `ca.crt` by following the client's relevant documentation.
```

+
[source,shell]
----
keytool -importcert -trustcacerts -noprompt -keystore http.p12 \
-storepass <password>  -alias new-ca -file ca.crt
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-keystore`:: Name of the HTTP truststore that you are importing the new CA
   certificate into. 

   `-storepass`:: Password for the CA truststore. 

   `-alias`:: Name that you want to assign to the new CA certificate entry in
   the keystore.

   `-file`:: Name of the new CA certificate to import.
====

. Check that the new CA certificate was added to your truststore. 
+
[source,shell]
----
keytool -keystore config/http.p12 -list
----
When prompted, enter the password for the CA truststore.
+
The output should contain both the existing CA certificate and your new
certificate. If you previously used the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool to
generate your keystore, the alias of the old CA defaults to `http` and the type

> of entry is `PrivateKeyEntry`.

Reviewer: let's remove this part

Author: @jkakavas, just to be clear, you're wanting to remove this part, correct?

> The output should contain both the existing CA certificate and your new
> certificate. If you previously used the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool to
> generate your keystore, the alias of the old CA defaults to `http` and the type
> of entry is `PrivateKeyEntry`.

Reviewer: nope, the whole thing, because of https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781#discussion_r671214300

Author: Got it -- I'll remove this section and make the change I proposed in that comment.

[[update-node-certs]]
== Updating node security certificates
You need to update your TLS certificates if your current node certificates might

> expire soon, you're adding new nodes to your secured cluster, or security

Author: I modified this intro a bit through some other updates, but I'll change to read:
>You might need to update your TLS certificates if your current node certificates expire soon, you're adding new nodes to your secured cluster, or a security breach has broken the trust of your certificate chain.

> breach has broken the trust of your certificate chain. In these instances where

Author: That's a good distinction. We do really want to distinguish between whether users have access to that original CA. I'm going to break up this paragraph and start a new one that says:

> In instances where you have access to the original Certificate Authority (CA) key and certificate that you used to sign your existing node certificates (and where your CA has not been compromised), you can <<update-node-certs-same,use that CA to sign the new certificates>>.

<<update-node-certs-same,your CA and key remains the same>>, you can sign new
certificates using the original Certificate Authority (CA) that you used to sign your existing certificates.

If you have to trust a new CA, you need to

> <<update-node-certs-different,generate a new CA certificate and key>> for each

Author: This section got updated recently through another review. I'll update it to read:

> If you have to trust a new CA from your organization, or you need to generate a new CA yourself, you need to use this new CA to sign the new node certificates and instruct your nodes to trust the new CA. In this case, you'll
> <<update-node-certs-different,generate a new node certificate and key>> for each
> node that is signed by the new CA certificate and instruct your nodes to trust
> this certificate chain.

node that is signed by the new CA certificate and instruct your nodes to trust
this certificate chain.

Depending on which certificates are expiring, you might need to update the
certificates for the transport layer, the HTTP layer, or both. 

Regardless of the scenario, {es} monitors the SSL resources for updates

> on a five-second interval, which is the default. You can just copy the new

Author: I'll change to read:
>Regardless of the scenario, {es} monitors the SSL resources for updates by default, on a five-second interval.

certificate and key files (or keystore) into the {es} configuration directory
and your nodes will detect the changes and reload the keys and certificates. 

Because {es} doesn't reload the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration,
you must use *the same file names* so that {es} refreshes the security

> certificates and keys.

Author: I'll change to read:
>Because {es} doesn't reload the `elasticsearch.yml` configuration, you must use *the same file names* if you want to take advantage of automatic certificate and key reloading.

You don't have to restart each node, but doing so forces new TLS connections and is <<use-rolling-restarts,a recommended practice>> when updating certificates.
Therefore, the following steps include a node restart after updating each
certificate.

The following steps provide instructions for generating new node certificates
and keys for both the transport layer and the HTTP layer. You might only need
to replace one of these layer's certificates depending on which of your
certificates are expiring.

[[cert-password-updates]] 
IMPORTANT: If your keystore is password protected, the password
is stored in the {es} secure settings, _and_ the password needs to change, then
you must perform a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>> on your cluster.
You must also use a different file name for the keystore so that {es} doesn't
reload the file before the node is restarted.

TIP: If your CA has changed, complete the steps in 
<<update-node-certs-different,update security certificates with a different CA>>.

[[node-certs-same-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer
The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS
keystores.

> Rather than run the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool once for each node, create an

Reviewer: This assume that each node uses a different keystore for the transport layer. Our [existing docs suggestion](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-basic-setup.html) and the default in 8.0.0 will be to use the same keystore for all nodes. Should we tackle this case here too for consistency, instead of the one we currently do ? Or at least point to it ?

Author: True, we use the same keystore for all nodes in our docs for configuring security. Do we anticipate that users will follow that convention? Furthermore, do we _recommend_ using a single keystore rather than generating a keystore for each node? When updating certificates with a different CA, do we also recommend using the same keystore for every node? If so, then we should parallel those procedures, unless there's a compelling reason not to. From my understanding, it's safer to have a keystore for each node so that if a keystore is compromised, users only need to update a single keystore rather than on every node when using the same one throughout the cluster.

Reviewer: > From my understanding, it's safer to have a keystore for each node

It is, but it's also more complicated and we've attempted to strike a balance. I think we need to sync our suggestions or at least include docs here for the case that we cover in the configuration docs too

Author: I'm ok with having these instructions parallel the initial configuration docs so that we're using one keystore for all nodes. I chatted with @BobBlank12 recently, and he mentioned using `instances.yml` to generate a keystore for each node. I just wanted to ensure that we're using the method in the docs that we intend users to employ in the real world.

before you update the password.

. If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/node1.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore, and then complete the remaining
steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.

. [[verify-keystore,step 9]](Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

. One node at a time, complete <<start-rolling-restart>> through
<<verify-keystore>> until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.

[discrete]
[[transport-layer-sameca-whatsnext]]
==== What's next?
Well done! You've updated the keystore for the transport layer. You can also
<<node-certs-same-http,update the keystore for the HTTP layer>> if
necessary. If you're not updating the keystore for the HTTP layer, then you're
all set. 

> [[node-certs-same-http]]

Reviewer: splitting this like that makes it easy and readable, but it introduces the misconception that one _MUST DO_ 2 rolling restarts, one for transport and one for http, while in practice they could combine the rotation of both layer certificates in the same rolling restart. Can we add something related to taht to make it obvious or do you think it will just confuse users?

Author: The reason I split them is because users might be updating certificates only for the transport layer or only the HTTP layer. We could clarify the last step to say:

> . If you're only updating certificates for the transport layer (and not the HTTPY layer), then complete <<start-rolling-restart>> through <<verify-keystore>> one node at a time until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.
> 
> Otherwise, do not complete a rolling restart and complete the steps for generating a new certificate for the HTTP layer.

==== Generate a new certificate for the HTTP layer
Other components such as {kib} or any of the Elastic language clients verify
this certificate when they connect to {es}.

NOTE: If your organization has its own CA, you'll need to 
<<certutil-csr,generate Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs)>>. CSRs contain
information that your CA uses to generate and sign a security certificate

> instead of using self-signed certificates that the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool

Author: To reduce ambiguity, I think we can just remove that last bit about the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool.

generates.

. On any node in your cluster where {es} is installed, run the {es} HTTP
certificate tool.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-certutil http
----
+
This command generates a `.zip` file that contains certificates and keys
to use with {es} and {kib}. Each folder contains a `README.txt`
explaining how to use these files.

   a. When asked if you want to generate a CSR, enter `n`.

   b. When asked if you want to use an existing CA, enter `y`.

   c. Enter the absolute path to your CA, such as the path to the
    `elastic-stack-ca.p12` file.

   d. Enter the password for your CA.

   e. Enter an expiration value for your certificate. You can enter the
   validity period in years, months, or days. For example, enter `1y` for one
   year.

   f. When asked if you want to generate one certificate per node, enter `y`.
+
Each certificate will have its own private key, and will be issued for a
specific hostname or IP address.

>    g. When prompted, enter the name of the first node in your cluster. Use the

Author: Let's say, "It's helpful to use the same node name as the value for the `node.name` parameter in the `elasticsearch.yml` file."

   same node name as the value for the `node.name` parameter in the
   `elasticsearch.yml` file.

   h. Enter all hostnames used to connect to your first node. These hostnames
   will be added as DNS names in the Subject Alternative Name (SAN) field in your certificate.
+
List every hostname and variant used to connect to your cluster over HTTPS.

   i. Enter the IP addresses that clients can use to connect to your node.

   j. Repeat these steps for each additional node in your cluster.

. After generating a certificate for each of your nodes, enter a password for
   your private key when prompted.

. Unzip the generated `elasticsearch-ssl-http.zip` file. This compressed file

>    contains one directory for both {es} and {kib}. Within the `/elasticsearch`

Author: I think we can clarify by saying:
>This compressed file contains two directories; one each for {es} and {kib}.

keystore with a new filename so that {es} doesn't attempt to reload the file
before you update the password.

. If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.http.ssl.enabled: true
xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.path: node1-http.p12
----

. If your keystore password is changing, add the password for your private key
to the secure settings in {es}.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore, and then complete the remaining
steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.

. [[verify-keystore-http,step 10]](Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

. One node at a time, complete <<start-rolling-restart-http>> through
<<verify-keystore-http>> until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.

[[update-node-certs-different]]
=== Update security certificates with a different CA
++++
<titleabbrev>With a different CA</titleabbrev>
++++

> If you have to trust a new CA, generate a new CA certificate and key for each
> node that is signed by the new CA certificate and instruct your nodes to trust
> this certificate chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have to trust a new CA from your organization, or you need to generate a new CA yourself, use this new CA to sign the new node certificates and instruct your nodes to trust the new CA. 
```

[[node-certs-different-transport]]
==== Generate a new certificate for the transport layer

> Create a new CA certificate and add it to your existing CA truststore. After

Reviewer: it's actually "After you have finished with updating your certificates for all nodes, you can remove the old CA certificate from your truststore" In that light, maybe not even mention it here and add it as a last step

{es} reloads the file, you can remove the old CA certificate from your
truststore.

NOTE: The following examples use PKCS#12 files, but the same steps apply to JKS
keystores.

. Open the `ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file and check the names of the

> security certificates that are currently in use. You'll use the same names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keystores that are currently in use. You'll use the same names
```

> for your new certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for your new keystores.
```

+
In this example, the keystore and truststore are using different files.
Your configuration might use the same file for both the keystore and the 
truststore. Elastic recommends using separate files. 
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/elastic-certificates.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. On *any* node in your cluster, generate a new CA certificate. You only need
to complete this step one time.
+

> NOTE: If your organization has its own CA, you'll need to 

Reviewer: Lets put that note _after_ the CA generation. This is related to nodes certifcate generation , not the CA certificate generation, so it might confuse users that we mention it here

+
If your 
<<cert-password-updates,keystore password is changing>>, then save the
keystore with a new filename so that {es} doesn't attempt to reload the file
before you update the password.

. If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.path: config/<node-name>.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.keystore.type: PKCS12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.path: config/elastic-stack-ca.p12
xpack.security.transport.ssl.truststore.type: PKCS12
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore, and then complete the remaining
steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.

. [[verify-keystore-newca,step 7]](Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

. One node at a time, complete <<start-rolling-restart-newca>> through
<<verify-keystore-newca>> until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.

. (Optional) After rotating keystores on each node in your cluster, remove the
old CA certificate from your truststore.
+
[source,shell]
----

> keytool -delete -noprompt -alias <old-ca>  -keystore config/elastic-stack-ca.p12 \

Reviewer: We never told them which one is the old-ca and what it's alias is so I think users will be confused here. Maybe mention that if they used elasticsearch-certutil originally, the alias of the old CA would probably be `ca` and the type of the entry `PrivateKeyEntry` ? That doesn't cover all cases though so I'm not sure if this is helpful or more confusing

Author: When they import the `ca.crt` certificate into their existing truststore, users will provide an alias for the new CA certificate. So it's really just removing the one that isn't the new one.

Reviewer: Sure, maybe we can explain this to them ? It might be obvious for us but I see a lot of folks looking at this confused as what is the old-ca

Author: I'm adding updating the previous step (revisions after this statement) to check that the new certificate was added to the truststore. We can then reference it at this point in the document so that users aren't surprised by what the old CA is or how to identify it.

> . Check that the new CA certificate was added to your truststore. 
> +
> [source,shell]
> ----
> keytool -keystore config/elastic-stack-ca.p12 -list
> ----
> When prompted, enter the password for the CA truststore.
> +
> The output should contain both the existing CA certificate and your new certificate. If you previously used the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool to generate your keystore, the alias of the old CA defaults to `ca` and the type of entry is `PrivateKeyEntry`.

-storepass <password>
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====

>    `-alias`:: Name of the old CA certificate that you want to remove from your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `-alias`:: Name of the keystore alias for the old CA certificate that you want to remove from your
```

   truststore.
====

[discrete]
[[transport-layer-newca-whatsnext]]
==== What's next?
Well done! You've updated the keystore for the transport layer. You can also
<<node-certs-different-http,update the keystore for the HTTP layer>> if
necessary. If you're not updating the keystore for the HTTP layer, then you're
all set. 

> [[node-certs-different-http]]

Reviewer: Somewhere here, early on, we need to tell the users that they can go to all the clients that connect to elasticserach ( kibana, beats,logstash,agent, language clients ) and configure them to also trust the new CA ( ca.crt ) that we generated. Then in the last steps of this section inform them that they can go back to the configuration of these clients and remove the trust old CA certificate. We can point to existing configuration. 

The issue is that if we don't mention anything and users will go through this section, they will have effectively cut off their ES cluster from anything that connect to it , and then they'd need to scramble to fix things or revert changes

Author: I'm adding some explanation at the beginning of this section about trusting the new CA for all clients, and adding the first two steps for importing and verifying that new CA.

Reviewer: > @jkakavas, do we only need to have users import the new CA into the existing keystore for the HTTP layer  

no, the don't need to

file names match. For example, `node1-http.p12`.
+
If your 
<<cert-password-updates,keystore password is changing>>, then save the
keystore with a new filename so that {es} doesn't attempt to reload the file
before you update the password.

. If you needed to save the new keystore with a new filename, update the
`ES_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch.yml` file to use the filename of the new keystore.
For example:
+
[source,yaml]
----
xpack.security.http.ssl.enabled: true
xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.path: node1-http.p12
----

. If your keystore password is changing, add the password for your private key
to the secure settings in {es}.
+
[source,shell]
----
./bin/elasticsearch-keystore add xpack.security.http.ssl.keystore.secure_password
----

. Start the node where you updated the keystore, and then complete the remaining
steps for a <<restart-cluster-rolling,rolling restart>>.

. [[verify-keystore-http-newca,step 10]](Optional) Use the <<security-api-ssl,SSL certificate API>> to verify that
{es} loaded the new keystore.

. One node at a time, complete <<start-rolling-restart-http-newca>> through
<<verify-keystore-http-newca>> until you've updated all keystores in your cluster.

> . (Optional) After rotating keystores on each node in your cluster, remove the

Reviewer: This is not needed. The CA certificate is not usually in the keystore that is used for HTTP

Author: Thanks for calling this out! I'll remove.

old CA certificate from your truststore. 
+
[source,shell]
----
keytool -delete -noprompt -alias <old-ca>  -keystore config/http.p12 \
-storepass <password>
----
+
[%collapsible%open]
.Command parameters
====
   `-alias`:: Name of the old CA certificate that you want to remove from your
   truststore.
====

[discrete]

> [[http-kibana-newca-whatsnext]]

Reviewer: I think we need to add a note for this (kibana and other clients) somewhere before. If you have reached this point, then you have changed certificates successfully and in that, you have broken communication from kibana, ingestion from logstash and beats and agent etc.

Author: See [these changes](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781/commits/e7d031f4e6a04130326d49d0b3e601449478fa58#diff-1490c74621f912bbdeb341055e902df727b240257b2fbd22bf774da6f8332f70R523-R531), which I added to address this scenario and your [other comment](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/73781#discussion_r666499084) about updating clients beforehand.

==== What's next?
Well done! You've updated the keystore for the HTTP layer. You can now
<<node-certs-different-kibana,update encryption between {kib} and {es}>>.

[[node-certs-different-kibana]]
==== Update encryption between {kib} and {es}

When you ran the `elasticsearch-certutil` tool with the `http` option, it
created a `/kibana` directory containing an `elasticsearch-ca.pem` file. You
use this file to configure {kib} to trust the {es} CA for the HTTP
layer.

. Copy the `elasticsearch-ca.pem` file to the {kib} configuration directory,
as defined by the `KBN_PATH_CONF` path.
+
NOTE: `KBN_PATH_CONF` contains the path for the {kib} configuration files. If
you installed {kib} using archive distributions (`zip` or `tar.gz`), the
path defaults to `KBN_HOME/config`. If you used package distributions
(Debian or RPM), the path defaults to `/etc/kibana`.

. If you modified the filename for the `elasticsearch-ca.pem` file, edit
`kibana.yml` and update the configuration to specify the location of the
security certificate for the HTTP layer.
+
[source,yaml]
----

> elasticsearch.ssl.certificateAuthorities: KBN_PATH_CONF/elasticsearch-ca.pem

Reviewer: for instance here we can put the new CA file along with the old one first ,then make the changes in ES in all nodes, and then remove the old CA certificate. `elasticsearch.ssl.certificateAuthorities` supports an array of values
